Sometimes we need to check more than
just two cases. So looking at the code
from the last video, we're testing to see
if age is greater than equal to 18 on line 5,
and we test the opposite condition,
age less than 18, on line 11.
In both cases, the condition can be either
True or False. If it's True,
the code blocks on lines 6 and 7 and line 12 are executed.
If the condition evaluates to False,
the code in the else block executes.
Python lets us test several conditions
by using elif, so I'll explain a couple
of rules about elif in a moment.
Firstly though, let's see an example of using it.
What I'm going to do is add another condition
to the second if statement. So I'm gonna come
down here to line 12, after line 12,
you could do a backspace there. I'm going to
type elif space age is equal to, that's two
equal signs 900: and on the indented line I'm gonna type print,
in parentheses double quotes,
Sorry, Yoda you die in Return of the Jedi,
and I've left the final else on line 15.
So elif, if you haven't guessed it, is short for else if.
The code now checks to see if age is
less than 18. If it is, the message on
line 12 will be printed. If age isn't
less than 18, Python checks the elif
condition on line 13. So that'll evaluate
to either True or False. If True,
we let Yoda know of his demise. We're assuming
that anyone who's 900 years old must
be Yoda from Star Wars, and if I just
spoiled that movie for you I do apologize.
But moving on, if the age
doesn't equal 900,
the condition evaluates to False and Python
continues with the else on line 15.
Now before I run the program, what I'm going
to do is comment out the first if
statement on lines 5 through 9, and
instead of having to manually go through
each line, most IDEs do have a quick way
of doing that. So in IntelliJ I can just
select the lines I want to comment out.
I'm on Windows, I can do a control
forward slash,
and it's a Cmd / if you're on a Mac
and the Ctrl slash will also work on
Linux. Alright, so that's commented out
and now won't execute. Let's run the
program, and first, I'm going to enter Tim
as my name again, which I've been doing.
Then next we have to enter an age.
We've got a few tests to perform, starting with
the value less than 18, so let's try that
and I'll do 11, and I'll just put the code
on screen there, so we can see that.
So you can see that's less than 18 that I entered,
11, and the code on line 12 was executed,
and we got that output, and
that's because the condition on line 11
evaluated to a true, and just to be
consistent let's check what happens when
I enter an age of exactly 18. Tim and
18, 18 You're old enough to vote.
Please put an X in the box, and
this time the condition on line 11
evaluated to False. Python then checks
the elif condition, the else if, on line 13.
This also evaluates to False and
therefore, line 14 didn't get executed.
Instead Python skipped to the else block.
There's no more conditions to check and
none of the ones that were checked were
True, so we're left with the else.
Lines 16 and 17 were executed and we get that
message that You're old enough to vote,
and to put an X in the box. And just to
confirm, if we run this again,
if I enter an age that's greater than 18, you should
see the same result. So I put, say 45.
Same result as we just talked about,
when I entered 18.
Alright, so the final test now is to enter 900 to see
whether that works, and you can see there 900,
Sorry Yoda you die in Return of the Jedi.
So we're getting that message and
that's because the elif, else if, for age
is equal to 900, evaluates to True,
and line 14 was executed. So all that would
be much easier to understand if we could
see the computer executing the code, line
by line. Well as it happens we can do that.
In the next couple of videos we're
going to have a look at the debugger
that's built into the IntelliJ IDEs.
We're going to look at the IntelliJ and
PyCharm debugger in the next video. In
the video after that we'll see how to do
the same thing with the debugger that's
built into IDLE. Now if you're using
a different IDE, it probably
has a debugger as well,
but please don't ask us how to use it.
There's literally hundreds of IDEs,
and we've chosen to use the Jetbrains products for this course.
If you use something else, then that's
either because you know how to use it,
or there's someone in your company who does
know. We can't, unfortunately, provide
support for other IDEs, but if it's
IntelliJ support you're after, were quite
happy to help you with that.
So let's move on now,
and I'll see you in the next video.